# Cogent Core

Cogent Core is a free and open source framework for building powerful, fast, and cogent 2D and 3D apps that run on macOS, Windows, Linux, iOS, Android, and the Web with a single pure Go codebase, allowing you to Code Once, Run Everywhere.

## Why Cogent Core?

The fundamental problem of programming is that people are stuck using irrational, inconsistent, and poorly written programming languages that have not been improved due to backward compatibility considerations. Even when they are improved, it destroys backward compatibility and creates an ongoing migration nightmare, like with Python 3. People pile layers of bad code on top of each other to patch problems, leading to an ongoing mess of new features on a shaky foundation of inelegant and unreadable code.

The solution to this is simple: a new, well-designed, readable, and elegant programming language that allows people to move forward instead of being permanently stuck using programming languages from the 1900s. That language is Go, but its principle failure has been the lack of a good GUI framework. GUIs are one of the most important forms of programming, as they bridge the gap between code and end users. GUIs generate excitement around a programming language, as they motivate new programmers with an approachable way to make immediately rewarding coding projects. What would you be more excited to make as a first time programmer, a helpful app or microservice infrastructure? There is a reason that web development is so popular: it gives an easy way to build exciting apps that target all users. Cogent Core aims to provide the same reach as web development, except instead of using an unstable emulsion of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, it is powered by an elegant language and comes with significantly more features and support for native apps.
